Update DuckDB configs docs to match current dbt-duckdb adapter (#8978)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/resource-configs/duckdb-configs.md

---
title: "DuckDB configurations"
id: "duckdb-configs"
description: "Reference the profile settings, external file options, incremental strategies, and other configs available in dbt-duckdb."
---

Use these settings to configure `dbt-duckdb` for DuckDB, MotherDuck, DuckLake, external files, and more.

> ## Set up your profile

Author: anything about your profile should be in `duckdb-setup.md`

the purpose of this page assumes that a user:
1. can connect w/ a profile
2. is familiar with both dbt and duckdb
3. wants to know specifically how to use dbt to configure duckdb for "Advanced" functionality

how to set up your profile isn't a part of that largely. however a lot of configuration does happen in the profiles.yml. so that is fair game

        s3_secret_access_key: "{{ env_var('S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY') }}"
```

> This profile runs `dbt-duckdb` against the [DuckDB](https://www.duckdb.org) file specified in `path` and persists relations across runs.

Author: this is about configuring s3 access w/ secrets management? maybe this is it's own thing?

Omitting the `path` field sets it to `:memory:`, which means the database runs in-memory and all data is lost after your run completes.

> `dbt-duckdb` automatically sets the `database` property to the basename of the file in the `path` argument with the suffix removed. For example, if the path is `/tmp/a/dbfile.duckdb`, the `database` field will be set to `dbfile`. If you are running in `:memory:` mode, then `database` is set to `memory`.

Author: this feels like a section for setup. as in, here's 3 ways to connect to duckdb locally:
1. `:memory:` and what that means
2. passing a `.duckdb` file to `path and what that means
3. passing `md:` to `path` (it's own section on motherduck!)
4. `attach:` w/ ducklake

## Use MotherDuck

> In `dbt-duckdb 1.5.2` and later, you can connect to a DuckDB instance running on [MotherDuck](https://motherduck.com) by setting `path` to an `md:` connection string, just as you would with the DuckDB CLI or Python API.

Author: yeah this goes to setup bc it is about "connecting", but any specific motherduck only config options should be on this page

MotherDuck databases generally work the same way as local DuckDB databases, with a few differences:

- MotherDuck is compatible with specific client DuckDB versions as described in [MotherDuck's documentation](https://motherduck.com/docs/architecture-and-capabilities#considerations-and-limitations).

> - MotherDuck preloads a set of common DuckDB extensions, but it does not support loading custom extensions or user-defined functions.

Author: i think there's some other specific limitations with MotherDuck. i think there's a motherduck docs page for this?

### DuckLake on MotherDuck

> In `dbt-duckdb 1.9.6` and later, you can connect to [hosted DuckLake on MotherDuck](https://motherduck.com/blog/ducklake-motherduck/) by creating a DuckLake on MotherDuck and then setting `is_ducklake: true` in `profiles.yml`.

Author: this should be wrapped in a docusaurus first version block for 1.9.6

First, create your DuckLake database in MotherDuck:

```sql
CREATE DATABASE my_ducklake
  (TYPE ducklake, DATA_PATH 's3://...')
```

Then configure your profile with the DuckLake database attached:

```yml
default:
  outputs:
    dev:
      type: duckdb
      path: "md:my_db?motherduck_token={{ env_var('MOTHERDUCK_TOKEN') }}"
      attach:
        - path: "md:my_ducklake"
          is_ducklake: true
  target: dev
```

> DuckLake must be identified with `is_ducklake: true` so that safe DDL operations are applied by dbt.

Author: ducklack should def be a section, i think it should be in config, but maybe there's a line in the setup page that says see the ducklack section of the config page for more info

## Configure extensions, settings, and filesystems

> You can install and load any core [DuckDB extensions](https://duckdb.org/docs/extensions/overview) by listing them in the `extensions` field in your profile. You can also set any additional [DuckDB configuration options](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/configuration) via the `settings` field, including options that are supported in loaded extensions.

Author: again this extensions are standalone section

You can also configure extensions from outside the core extension repository (such as a community extension) by configuring the extension as a `name`/`repo` pair:

```yml
default:
  outputs:
    dev:
      type: duckdb
      path: /tmp/dbt.duckdb
      extensions:
        - httpfs
        - parquet
        - name: h3
          repo: community
        - name: uc_catalog
          repo: core_nightly
  target: dev
```

> In `dbt-duckdb 1.4.1` and later, you can experimentally use DuckDB filesystems implemented via [fsspec](https://duckdb.org/docs/guides/python/filesystems.html). The `fsspec` library supports a [variety of cloud data storage systems](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html#other-known-implementations), including S3, GCS, and Azure Blob Storage. To use an `fsspec` implementation with `dbt-duckdb`, install the relevant Python modules and configure your profile like this:

Author: this is it's own section imho: "duckdb on blob" idk if it should go on setup or config page

This will run your dbt-duckdb pipeline against the [DuckDB](https://www.duckdb.org) file at the specified `path`, persisting relations across runs.

Omitting the `path` field sets it to `:memory:`, which means the database runs in-memory and all data is lost after your run completes.

> `dbt-duckdb` automatically sets the `database` property to the basename of the file in the `path` argument with the suffix removed. For example, if the path is `/tmp/a/dbfile.duckdb`, the `database` field will be set to `dbfile`. If you are running in in-memory mode, then `database` is set to `memory`.

Author: Agree. `in-memory mode` or `:memory:` mode is clearer here.

  target: dev
```

### Scoped credentials by storage prefix

Secrets can be scoped so that different storage paths use different credentials:

```yml
default:
  outputs:
    dev:
      type: duckdb
      path: /tmp/dbt.duckdb
      extensions:
        - httpfs
        - parquet
      secrets:
        - type: s3
          provider: credential_chain
          scope: [ "s3://bucket-in-eu-region", "s3://bucket-2-in-eu-region" ]
          region: "eu-central-1"
        - type: s3
          region: us-west-2
          scope: "s3://bucket-in-us-region"
```

When fetching a secret for a path, the secret scopes are compared to the path, returning the matching secret for the path. In the case of multiple matching secrets, the longest prefix is chosen.

> ## Attach additional databases

Author: great. this is def it's own section but i'm leaning towards it going in setup

  target: dev
```

The attached databases may be referred to in your dbt sources and models by either:

- The basename of the database file, minus its suffix (for example `/tmp/other.duckdb` is the `other` database and `s3://yep/even/this/works.duckdb` is the `works` database).
- By an alias you specify (the `./yet/another.duckdb` database in the above configuration is referred to as `yet_another` instead of `another`).

These additional databases do not necessarily have to be DuckDB files. DuckDB's storage and catalog engines are pluggable. You can indicate the type of the database you are connecting to via the `type` argument, which currently supports `duckdb`, `sqlite`, and `postgres`.

For DuckLake, use `ducklake:` for local databases; for MotherDuck-managed DuckLake, use `md:` with `is_ducklake: true`:

```yml
attach:
  - path: "ducklake:my_ducklake.ddb"
  - path: "md:my_other_ducklake"
    is_ducklake: true
```

### Arbitrary ATTACH options

You can use the `options` dictionary to pass any additional key-value pairs to DuckDB's `ATTACH` statement. This allows you to take advantage of new DuckDB features without waiting for explicit support in `dbt-duckdb`:

```yml
attach:

>   - path: /tmp/db1.duckdb

Author: Agree. The example should use a SQLite-looking filename so the `type: sqlite` config is unambiguous.

    return pa.RecordBatchReader.from_batches(batch_reader.schema, batch_iter)
```

### Use local Python modules

> The profile setting `module_paths` allows you to specify a list of paths on the filesystem that contain additional Python modules that should be added to the Python process's `sys.path`. This allows you to include additional helper Python modules in your dbt projects that can be accessed by the running dbt process and used to define custom dbt-duckdb plugins or library code for Python models. <!--add comment-->

Reviewer: Not sure if this rewrite is technically correct: 
```suggestion
The `module_paths` profile setting lets you specify a list of filesystem paths containing additional Python modules. These paths are added to the dbt process’s `sys.path`, making the modules importable within dbt. This allows you to include helper code in your project, such as custom `dbt-duckdb` plugins or shared libraries for Python models.
```

Author: Accepted. I tightened this wording in `ddd3449` so it stays closer to adapter behavior and avoids overstating what `module_paths` does.

## External files

One of DuckDB's most powerful features is its ability to read and write CSV, JSON, and Parquet files directly, without needing to import or export them from the database first.

### Read from external files

> You can reference external files in your dbt models either directly or as dbt sources by configuring the `external_location` in either the `meta` or the `config` option on the source definition. Settings under `meta` will be propagated to the documentation generated via `dbt docs generate`, but settings under `config` will not be. <!--config under meta?-->

Reviewer: `meta` is now nested under `config`. Docs [here](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/resource-configs/meta?version=2.0). Should this be: 
```suggestion
You can reference external files in your dbt models either directly or as dbt sources by setting `external_location` under `config.meta` on your source definition. Use `meta` to attach additional metadata that will appear in the documentation generated by `dbt docs generate`.
```

Author: Accepted. I reverted this section to `config.meta` and clarified the distinction with direct `config.external_location` in `ddd3449` to match the current `meta` docs.

```yml
sources:
  - name: external_source

>     meta:

Reviewer: Should this be reverted? [Doc](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/resource-configs/meta?version=2.0)

Author: Yes. Reverted in `ddd3449`.

      external_location: "s3://my-bucket/my-sources/{name}.parquet"
    tables:
      - name: source1
      - name: source2
```

Here, the `meta` setting on `external_source` defines `external_location` as an f-string that lets you express a pattern for the location of any table defined for that source. For example, a dbt model like:

```sql
SELECT *
FROM {{ source('external_source', 'source1') }}
```

Will be compiled as:

```sql
SELECT *
FROM 's3://my-bucket/my-sources/source1.parquet'
```

If one of the source tables deviates from the pattern, you can also set the `external_location` on the table itself:

```yml
sources:
  - name: external_source

>     meta:

Reviewer: Should this be reverted? [Doc](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/resource-configs/meta?version=2.0)

Author: Yes. Reverted this example too in `ddd3449`.

These additional databases do not necessarily have to be DuckDB files. DuckDB's storage and catalog engines are pluggable. You can indicate the type of the database you are connecting to via the `type` argument, which currently supports `duckdb`, `sqlite`, and `postgres`.

For DuckLake, use `ducklake:` for local databases; for MotherDuck-managed DuckLake, use `md:` with `is_ducklake: true`:

```yml
attach:
  - path: "ducklake:my_ducklake.ddb"
  - path: "md:my_other_ducklake"
    is_ducklake: true
```

### Arbitrary ATTACH options

You can use the `options` dictionary to pass any additional key-value pairs to DuckDB's `ATTACH` statement. This allows you to take advantage of new DuckDB features without waiting for explicit support in `dbt-duckdb`:

```yml
attach:
  - path: /tmp/db1.db
    type: sqlite
    read_only: true
  - path: /tmp/special.duckdb
    options:
      cache_size: 1GB
      threads: 4
      enable_fsst: true
```

If you specify the same option in both a direct field (`type`, `secret`, `read_only`) and in the `options` dict, `dbt-duckdb` will raise an error to prevent conflicts.

> ## Use plugins

Author: not a not that needs to change, but, this scares me.

maybe this is one thing that we just link out to the dbt-duckdb repo for esp bc it won't be supported in Fusion or in dbt Platform.

so keep the section then just link out

- `sqlalchemy` depends on `pandas`, `sqlalchemy`, and the driver(s) you need
- `delta` depends on `deltalake` (experimental)

### Write your own plugins

Defining your own `dbt-duckdb` plugin requires creating a Python module that defines a class named `Plugin` that inherits from `dbt.adapters.duckdb.plugins.BasePlugin`. There are four methods that may be implemented:

1. `initialize` &mdash; Takes in the `config` dictionary for the plugin defined in the profile. Called once when the `Plugin` class is created.
2. `configure_connection` &mdash; Takes a `DuckDBPyConnection` object and can perform additional configuration, like defining custom user-defined functions.
3. `load` &mdash; Takes a `SourceConfig` instance and can optionally return a DataFrame-like object that DuckDB knows how to turn into a table.
4. `store` &mdash; Takes a `TargetConfig` instance for an `external` materialization and can perform additional operations once the file is written (for example, registering with AWS Glue or uploading to an external database).

Refer to the [built-in plugins](https://github.com/duckdb/dbt-duckdb/tree/master/dbt/adapters/duckdb/plugins) for examples.

## Use Python models

> dbt supports [Python models](/docs/build/python-models) in `dbt Core` 1.3 and later. In `dbt-duckdb`, Python models run in the same process that owns the DuckDB connection. The `.py` file is loaded as a Python module using [`importlib`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/importlib.html), the `model` function is called with a `dbt` object (containing `ref` and `source` information) and a `DuckDBPyConnection` object, and the returned object is materialized as a table.

Author: this whole section should be in a version block for 1.3? though, do we even still have those versions around?!

          formatter: oldstyle
```

The `formatter` configuration option indicates whether to use `newstyle` string formatting (the default), `oldstyle` string formatting, or `template` string formatting. The `oldstyle` formatter is needed here because `str.format` would interpret the `types={'FlightDate': 'DATE'}` argument as a template variable.

> ### Write to external files

Author: great yeah this is its own section for sure

If the `location` argument is specified, it must be a filename (or S3 bucket/path), and `dbt-duckdb` will attempt to infer the `format` argument from the file extension of the `location` if the `format` argument is unspecified.

If the `location` argument is not specified, the external file will be named after the `model.sql` (or `model.py`) file that defined it with an extension that matches the `format` argument. By default, external files are created relative to the current working directory. You can change the default directory (or S3 bucket/prefix) by specifying the `external_root` setting in your DuckDB profile.

Incremental materialization strategies are not supported for `external` models.

### Registering external models

When using `:memory:` as the DuckDB database, subsequent dbt runs can fail when selecting a subset of models that depend on external tables. This is because external files are only registered as DuckDB views when they are created, not when they are referenced. To overcome this issue, use the `register_upstream_external_models` macro at the beginning of a run:

```yml
on-run-start:
  - "{{ register_upstream_external_models() }}"
```

> ## Use the `table_function` materialization

Author: great. worth checking how relevant `table_function` still is

`dbt-duckdb` provides a custom `table_function` materialization to use DuckDB's [Table Function / Table Macro](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/statements/create_macro.html) feature to provide parameterized views.

Benefits of using `table_function`:
- Late binding means the underlying table can change (have new columns added) and the function does not need to be recreated, unlike views.
- Parameters can force filter pushdown.
- Functions can provide advanced features like dynamic SQL.

Example `table_function` creation with 0 parameters:

```sql
{{
    config(
        materialized='table_function'
    )
}}
select * from {{ ref("example_table") }}
```

Example invocation (parentheses are required even with 0 parameters):

```sql
select * from {{ ref("my_table_function") }}()
```

Example `table_function` with 2 parameters:

```sql
{{
    config(
        materialized='table_function',
        parameters=['where_a', 'where_b']
    )
}}
select *
from {{ ref("example_table") }}
where 1=1
    and a = where_a
    and b = where_b
```

Example invocation with parameters:

```sql
select * from {{ ref("my_table_function_with_parameters") }}(1, 2)
```

> ## Use incremental strategies

Author: great. another section that seems to have not existed before!

In conditions and expressions, use `DBT_INTERNAL_SOURCE` to reference the incoming data and `DBT_INTERNAL_DEST` to reference the existing target table.

### Microbatch strategy

The `microbatch` strategy requires `dbt Core` 1.9 or later and runs incremental builds in time-based batches using a configured `event_time` column.

| Configuration | Type | Default | Description |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `event_time` | string | required | Name of the timestamp column used for microbatch windowing. |
| `begin` | string | required | Start time for batching (for example `2025-01-01`). |
| `batch_size` | string | required | Batch grain (for example `day`, `hour`). |
| `incremental_predicates` | list | null | Optional additional predicates applied within each batch. |

:::tip
Microbatching might not always be the best option from a performance perspective. DuckDB operates on row groups, not physical partitions (unless you have explicitly partitioned data in a DuckLake). Be sure to test different amounts of threads to match your use case.
:::

> ## Configure DuckLake table partitioning

Author: maybe this can be foldeed into another section? ducklake? or is this only relevant to incremental models??
